Title: Gemican Docs
Date: 2021-09-25 22:38
Slug: index
Authors: Kevin Houlihan, Justin Mayer, Alexis Metaireau, contributors
Summary: Capsule index
URL: index.gmi
save_as: index.gmi
Template: capsule_intro
Status: hidden

# Gemican

Gemican is a static Gemini capsule generator, written in Python.

It is based on the static site generator, Pelican.

Highlights include:

* Write your content directly with your editor of choice in Gemtext or Markdown formats
* Includes a simple CLI tool to (re)generate your site
* Easy to interface with distributed version control systems and web hooks
* Completely static output is easy to host anywhere

=> gemini://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/gemtext.gmi Gemtext
=> https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/ Markdown

Ready to get started? Check out the Quickstart guide.

=> {filename}/pages/quickstart.md Quickstart

## Features

Gemican’s feature highlights include:

* Articles (e.g., blog posts) and pages (e.g., "About", "Projects", "Contact")
* Integration with external services
* Site themes (created using Jinja2)
* Publication of articles in multiple languages
* Generation of Atom and RSS feeds
* Import existing content from WordPress, Dotclear, or RSS feeds
* Fast rebuild times thanks to content caching and selective output writing
* Extensible via plugins

## Why the name "Gemican"?

"Gemican" is an anagram of *camegin*, which means nothing in any language.

Only joking - Gemican is based on the Pelican static site generator, and took its name from that.

=> https://getpelican.com/ Pelican

## Source code

You can access the source code at:

=> https://github.com/khoulihan/gemican Gemican GitHub

## How to get help, contribute, or provide feedback

See our feedback and contribution submission guidelines.

=> {filename}/pages/contribute.md Contribute

## Documentation

=> {filename}/pages/quickstart.md Quickstart
=> {filename}/pages/install.md Install
=> {filename}/pages/content.md Content
=> {filename}/pages/publish.md Publish
=> {filename}/pages/settings.md Settings
=> {filename}/pages/themes.md Themes
=> {filename}/pages/plugins.md Plugins
=> {filename}/pages/gemican-themes.md gemican-themes
=> {filename}/pages/importer.md Importer
=> {filename}/pages/faq.md FAQ
=> {filename}/pages/tips.md Tips
=> {filename}/pages/contribute.md Contribute
=> {filename}/pages/internals.md Internals
=> {filename}/pages/report.md History
=> {filename}/pages/changelog.md Changelog
